---
title: Ubuntu 22.04 migration
tags: linux, yak shaving
---

Finally I found the gap at work to move my work laptop to ubuntu 22.04.

- I started with the ubuntu server iso instead of the desktop iso to keep unwanted features out. I had the laptop on ethernet as I was not sure if the wireless driver would be part of the iso.
- I went with Plasma Desktop/KDE as the window manager instead of my usual xmonad. Webex Teams is to blame. 
- Using [Nixpkgs](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/installation/installing-binary.html#installing-a-binary-distribution) + [home-manager](https://rycee.gitlab.io/home-manager/) along with dotfiles made it very easy to get the user space programs back. 

# Detours

## sddm

I installed nixpkgs in daemon mode. This creates a bunch of build users. I was looking for a way to hide the users in SDDM login screen.
None of the options in the [SDDM config file](https://manpages.ubuntu.com/manpages/jammy/en/man5/sddm.conf.5.html) seemed to take effect.
Starting the sddm greeter in test mode seemed to use the configuration correctly.

~~~
> sddm-greeter --test-mode
~~~
 
Reading the source did not help much either. Eventually I stumbled upon the solution that sddm configuration files need to be files and not symbolic links to files.
I could not figure this out from the source but this restriction makes sense for a component that controls the login screen.

The other irritation was sddm starting with a on-screen keyboard by default. I had to configure the `InputMethod` option to disable it.

~~~
[Users]
HideShells=/sbin/nologin
MaximumUid=20000
MinimumUid=1000

[X11]
EnableHiDPI=true
MinimumVT=7

[General]

# Input method module
InputMethod=
~~~

## home-manager

The change in configuration file location and format since 2021 led to a bit of head scratching. The config file location changed from
`~/.config/nixpkgs/home.nix` to `~/.config/home-manager/home.nix`. I also had a mismatch between the nixpkgs channel and the home-manager channel.
`nixpkgs` channel was set to master and I had to use the corresponding home-manager channel. Once the channels matched, the package installation was smooth.

## Nix

I am experimenting using Nix for installing fonts as well. This requires running `fc-cache` with the installation path as argument.

~~~
> nix-env -iA nixpkgs.jetbrains-mono
> fc-cache -v $HOME/.nix-profile/share/fonts/
~~~

## dmesg

`dmesg` not being accessible to normal user was surprise coming from 18.04. Apparently the change was introduced in ubuntu 20.10.
I had to set `kernel.dmesg_restrict = 0` in `/etc/sysctl.d/10-kernel-hardening.conf` to allow non-root users access to dmesg.

<https://unix.stackexchange.com/questions/390184/dmesg-read-kernel-buffer-failed-permission-denied#390187>
